deeplearning.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Deep Learning
<!-- subtitle: Our codes focused on deep learning -->
---

Codes available:
1. [Parametric Study](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#parametric-study)
    * [Multiparametric Tool](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#multiparametric-tool)

2. [Spatial Resolution Enhancement](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#spatial-resolution-enhancement)
    * [Superresolution Tool](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#superresolution-tool)

3. [Temporal Forecasting](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#temporal-forecasting)
    * [Hybrid Generative Model](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-generative-model)
        - [Standard](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-generative-standard)
        - [Advanced](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-generative-advanced)
    * [Full Deep Learning Generative Model](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#full-dl-generative-model)
        - [Residual](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#full-generative-residual)
        - [Variational](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#full-generative-variational)
    * [Hybrid Predictive Model](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-predictive-model)
    * [Remote Sensing and DLinear](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#dlinear)

3. [Control](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#control)

## Parametric Study <a id="parametric-study"></a>

### Multiparametric Tool <a id="multiparametric-tool"></a>
Numerical simulations of complex fluid phenomena are computationally expensive in terms of computational resources and processing time. Several numerical simulations must be performed to analyze the behavior of the flow under different flow regimes or parameters, and this entire process can take several weeks or even months.

To overcome these limitations, we have developed an innovative tool capable of efficiently generating new fluid dynamics databases for specific flow conditions (parameters) and predicting their behavior over time. This is achieved using a hybrid, fully data-driven Reduced-Order Model (ROM), which combines Higher-Order Modal Decomposition (HOSVD) with Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and the Kriging interpolation method, also known as Gaussian Process Regression (GPR).

This framework has been developed using [Python]( https://www.python.org/)’s ML libraries, [Tensorflow]( https://www.tensorflow.org/)/[Keras]( https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/keras?hl=es-419), and the [PyKrige]( https://geostat-framework.readthedocs.io/projects/pykrige/en/stable/index.html ) interpolation library. The tool has been tested on databases obtained through numerical simulations at different flow parameters, such as Reynolds number and Angle of Attack.

![Multi-parametric tool - Methodology](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/2025_01_30_Barragan_multipar.png?raw=true)
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*
<!-- You can [Download](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/raw/refs/heads/master/assets/codes/parametric.zip) the algorithms here.   -->

## Spatial Resolution Enhancement <a id="spatial-resolution-enhancement"></a>

### Superresolution Tool <a id="superresolution-tool"></a>
Fluid mechanics plays a significant role in most natural and anthropogenic processes. During the last decades, numerical methods such as the Finite Volume Method (FVM) have been widely used to predict the behavior of fluid dynamics phenomena. However, performing accurate numerical simulations for complex flows (such as those in a turbulent regime, multiphase flows, multiscale phenomena, etc.) demands significant computational resources in terms of processing and storage capacity and takes long periods of time to converge.

In order to overcome the limitations of conventional numerical solvers, a fully data-driven hybrid physics-based Reduced-Order Model (ROM) that combines modal decomposition methods and Machine Learning (ML) has been developed. This methodology combines Higher-Order Singular Value Decomposition ([HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd)) with fully connected neural networks (FCNN) to enhance the spatial resolution of a fluid dynamics database. [HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd) has demonstrated its capability of extracting the main patterns and structures of fluid dynamics phenomena while denoising and compressing the database, while Neural Networks are able to model the non-linearities. This framework has been developed using [Python]( https://www.python.org/)’s ML libraries [Tensorflow]( https://www.tensorflow.org/)/[Keras]( https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/keras?hl=es-419)

![Super resolution tool - Methodology ](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/2025_01_30_Barragan_superresolution.png?raw=true)
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

<!-- You can [Download](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/raw/refs/heads/master/assets/codes/SUPERRESOLUTION.zip) the algorithms here.  -->

## Temporal Forecasting <a id="temporal-forecasting"></a>

### Hybrid Generative Model <a id="hybrid-generative-model"></a>

#### Standard <a id="hybrid-generative-standard"></a>
This model presents a hybrid ROM integrating Higher Order Singular Value Decomposition ([HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd)) with Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) architecture for temporal predictions. The integration of [HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd) enables dimensionality reduction and the LSTM model processes the sequences, capturing nonlinear dynamics and preserving long-term temporal correlations. Predictions are generated autoregressively, where forecasted solutions are fed back as inputs to itteratively predict the next step.  While this approach can also be implemented with Singular Value Decomposition (SVD),  [HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd) extends the capabilities of SVD by better preserving multi-dimensional structures, leading to improved performance in complex dynamical systems. This framework is implemented using TensorFlow/Keras for 4D and 5D tensors.

![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/d356b4aa65afd90fa0e8e1cba902d919b621e307/assets/img/2025_01_30_sengupta_Temporalforecasting.PNG?raw=true) 
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*
 
#### Advanced <a id="hybrid-generative-advanced"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*


### Full Deep Learning Generative Model <a id="full-dl-generative-model"></a>

#### Residual <a id="full-generative-residual"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

#### Variational <a id="full-generative-variational"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*


### Hybrid Predictive Model <a id="hybrid-predictive-model"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*


### Remote Sensing and DLinear <a id="dlinear"></a>
LC-SVD-DLinear (and LC-HOSVD-DLinear) are two hybrid machine learning models that combine [low-cost singular value decomposition (LC-SVD)](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#low-cost-svd) and [low-cost high-order singular value decomposition](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#low-cost-hosvd) with the DLinear architecture to efficiently forecast high-resolution experimental data collected from optimally placed sensors. These models operate by first using LC-SVD or LC-HOSVD to break down the experimental data and up-sample the temporal coefficients, POD modes, and singular values, significantly reducing computational cost while retaining all physical information. The reconstructed temporal coefficients are then processed by the DLinear model, which decomposes them into trend and seasonality components to identify temporal patterns and predict future values autoregressively, using the sliding window mechanism. Finally, the predicted temporal coefficients are combined with the reconstructed POD modes and singular values to generate high-resolution forecast snapshots, ensuring both accuracy and efficiency in handling complex, high-dimensional data.

![LC-SVD-DLinear architecture summary](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/LC-SVD-DLinear.jpg?raw=true) 

[Hetherington, A., Leonés, J. L., & Clainche, S. L. (2024). LC-SVD-DLinear: A low-cost physics-based hybrid machine learning model for data forecasting using sparse measurements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17433.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17433)

*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

## Control <a id="control"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

Commit message:

Added LC-SVD-DLinear .ipynb link

deeplearning.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Deep Learning
<!-- subtitle: Our codes focused on deep learning -->
---

Codes available:
1. [Parametric Study](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#parametric-study)
    * [Multiparametric Tool](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#multiparametric-tool)

2. [Spatial Resolution Enhancement](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#spatial-resolution-enhancement)
    * [Superresolution Tool](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#superresolution-tool)

3. [Temporal Forecasting](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#temporal-forecasting)
    * [Hybrid Generative Model](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-generative-model)
        - [Standard](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-generative-standard)
        - [Advanced](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-generative-advanced)
    * [Full Deep Learning Generative Model](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#full-dl-generative-model)
        - [Residual](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#full-generative-residual)
        - [Variational](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#full-generative-variational)
    * [Hybrid Predictive Model](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#hybrid-predictive-model)
    * [Remote Sensing and DLinear](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#dlinear)

3. [Control](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/deeplearning/#control)

## Parametric Study <a id="parametric-study"></a>

### Multiparametric Tool <a id="multiparametric-tool"></a>
Numerical simulations of complex fluid phenomena are computationally expensive in terms of computational resources and processing time. Several numerical simulations must be performed to analyze the behavior of the flow under different flow regimes or parameters, and this entire process can take several weeks or even months.

To overcome these limitations, we have developed an innovative tool capable of efficiently generating new fluid dynamics databases for specific flow conditions (parameters) and predicting their behavior over time. This is achieved using a hybrid, fully data-driven Reduced-Order Model (ROM), which combines Higher-Order Modal Decomposition (HOSVD) with Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and the Kriging interpolation method, also known as Gaussian Process Regression (GPR).

This framework has been developed using [Python]( https://www.python.org/)’s ML libraries, [Tensorflow]( https://www.tensorflow.org/)/[Keras]( https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/keras?hl=es-419), and the [PyKrige]( https://geostat-framework.readthedocs.io/projects/pykrige/en/stable/index.html ) interpolation library. The tool has been tested on databases obtained through numerical simulations at different flow parameters, such as Reynolds number and Angle of Attack.

![Multi-parametric tool - Methodology](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/2025_01_30_Barragan_multipar.png?raw=true)
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*
<!-- You can [Download](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/raw/refs/heads/master/assets/codes/parametric.zip) the algorithms here.   -->

## Spatial Resolution Enhancement <a id="spatial-resolution-enhancement"></a>

### Superresolution Tool <a id="superresolution-tool"></a>
Fluid mechanics plays a significant role in most natural and anthropogenic processes. During the last decades, numerical methods such as the Finite Volume Method (FVM) have been widely used to predict the behavior of fluid dynamics phenomena. However, performing accurate numerical simulations for complex flows (such as those in a turbulent regime, multiphase flows, multiscale phenomena, etc.) demands significant computational resources in terms of processing and storage capacity and takes long periods of time to converge.

In order to overcome the limitations of conventional numerical solvers, a fully data-driven hybrid physics-based Reduced-Order Model (ROM) that combines modal decomposition methods and Machine Learning (ML) has been developed. This methodology combines Higher-Order Singular Value Decomposition ([HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd)) with fully connected neural networks (FCNN) to enhance the spatial resolution of a fluid dynamics database. [HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd) has demonstrated its capability of extracting the main patterns and structures of fluid dynamics phenomena while denoising and compressing the database, while Neural Networks are able to model the non-linearities. This framework has been developed using [Python]( https://www.python.org/)’s ML libraries [Tensorflow]( https://www.tensorflow.org/)/[Keras]( https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/keras?hl=es-419)

![Super resolution tool - Methodology ](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/2025_01_30_Barragan_superresolution.png?raw=true)
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

<!-- You can [Download](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/raw/refs/heads/master/assets/codes/SUPERRESOLUTION.zip) the algorithms here.  -->

## Temporal Forecasting <a id="temporal-forecasting"></a>

### Hybrid Generative Model <a id="hybrid-generative-model"></a>

#### Standard <a id="hybrid-generative-standard"></a>
This model presents a hybrid ROM integrating Higher Order Singular Value Decomposition ([HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd)) with Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) architecture for temporal predictions. The integration of [HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd) enables dimensionality reduction and the LSTM model processes the sequences, capturing nonlinear dynamics and preserving long-term temporal correlations. Predictions are generated autoregressively, where forecasted solutions are fed back as inputs to itteratively predict the next step.  While this approach can also be implemented with Singular Value Decomposition (SVD),  [HOSVD](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#pattern-hosvd) extends the capabilities of SVD by better preserving multi-dimensional structures, leading to improved performance in complex dynamical systems. This framework is implemented using TensorFlow/Keras for 4D and 5D tensors.

![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/d356b4aa65afd90fa0e8e1cba902d919b621e307/assets/img/2025_01_30_sengupta_Temporalforecasting.PNG?raw=true) 
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*
 
#### Advanced <a id="hybrid-generative-advanced"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*


### Full Deep Learning Generative Model <a id="full-dl-generative-model"></a>

#### Residual <a id="full-generative-residual"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

#### Variational <a id="full-generative-variational"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*


### Hybrid Predictive Model <a id="hybrid-predictive-model"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*


### Remote Sensing and DLinear <a id="dlinear"></a>
LC-SVD-DLinear (and LC-HOSVD-DLinear) are two hybrid machine learning models that combine [low-cost singular value decomposition (LC-SVD)](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#low-cost-svd) and [low-cost high-order singular value decomposition](https://modelflows.github.io/modelflowsapp/modaldecomposition/#low-cost-hosvd) with the DLinear architecture to efficiently forecast high-resolution experimental data collected from optimally placed sensors. These models operate by first using LC-SVD or LC-HOSVD to break down the experimental data and up-sample the temporal coefficients, POD modes, and singular values, significantly reducing computational cost while retaining all physical information. The reconstructed temporal coefficients are then processed by the DLinear model, which decomposes them into trend and seasonality components to identify temporal patterns and predict future values autoregressively, using the sliding window mechanism. Finally, the predicted temporal coefficients are combined with the reconstructed POD modes and singular values to generate high-resolution forecast snapshots, ensuring both accuracy and efficiency in handling complex, high-dimensional data.

![LC-SVD-DLinear architecture summary](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/LC-SVD-DLinear.jpg?raw=true) 

[Hetherington, A., Leonés, J. L., & Clainche, S. L. (2024). LC-SVD-DLinear: A low-cost physics-based hybrid machine learning model for data forecasting using sparse measurements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17433.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17433)

*Work in progress. Coming soon...*

<!-- [Download the LC-SVD-DLinear.ipynb](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/raw/refs/heads/master/assets/codes/LC-SVD-DLinear.zip)
<!-- [Download the SVD-DLinear.ipynb](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/raw/refs/heads/master/assets/codes/SVD-DLinear.zip)

## Control <a id="control"></a>
<!-- Short description of the method. -->
<!-- ![Figure text](https://github.com/modelflows/modelflowsapp/blob/master/assets/img/YOURIMAGEHERE.png?raw=true) -->
*Work in progress. Coming soon...*
